Hello everybody and welcome to this lecture where we are gonna play with the mirror modifier the mirror
modifier will duplicates or mirror any object that it's applied to and here you can see we can move one
cube around and the other one moves along with it.
Now this is a great tool for whenever you're modeling something that is symmetrical it means that you
don't have to worry about both sides of the object whether it's a plane a human or a knight.
It'll be incredibly useful.
So let's find out more okay.
So welcome to the fold blend file.
Let's go ahead and add the mirror modifier straightaway.
And then we can discuss why it's not working.
Okay.
So we go over to the right hand side to the properties window and go to the modifiers tab which is the
one that looks like a spanner or wrench going to add a modifier and go to the Generate column because
we're generating new geometry and go to mirror.
And here we go we've applied the mirror modifier and we have a look we've got a couple of options down
here we've got these different axes here we've got bisect flip we've got a mirror object and there's
loads more other options down here.
First of all what happens with the X axis ticked.
Well what it means is that along this X axis that's is where is going to be mirrored.
So this cube is being mirrored either side of its own origin.
At the moment it's got no other mirrored object to refer to.
So it's just going to use itself in fact if I shift and right click over here and then right click and
set the origin to the 3d cursor There we go we can now see that it is indeed the objects origin that
is reflecting about and we can now move this and it all moves together.
So if you were doing it like this you'd need to be in edit mode.
And now when you move your geometry it will mirror about the origin points along the X axis as we can
see here put a tick in the Y axis as well you can see we get four and if I put one in the Z axis
you can see it goes along the Z axis and this can be incredibly useful if you're making anything
to be quite honest if it has these axes of symmetry.
Now our knight is going to have one axis of symmetry running straight down the middle.
So we only need one of these ticked but having it all the way over here.
That's no good.
So what else can we do.
Well my preferred method for using the mirror modifier is to have an object.
So when you're moving your messages around you have much more control over it.
So I'm going to send to my 3d cursor if shift in S and cursor to world origin and then I'm going to add
in an empty.
I'm going to call that empty straightaway something.
So let's scroll up here and I'm going to call it mirror point.
Now you don't have to do this but it is my recommendation it's just my personal workflow.
And then in the cube itself in the mirror modify we can set the mirror object to be that mirror point.
And now it doesn't matter where the origin is that's incredibly important.
If you're using the origin as a pivot point or a gravity point that wasn't smack bang in the center of
a model of course.
Now everything's all skewed.
I'm going to go ahead and set my origin back to the center of the geometry where it would be normally
we could see this is the real one over here and this is the one that's being generated by our modifier.
And then we can move things back together.
Now you're probably wondering as we push these things back together that we have intersecting geometry
going on and you would be right if we scroll down here there's a couple of options.
There's vertex groups merging and clipping now clipping is the one we want to turn on.
Which means that this mirror points here which happens to be exactly where the Y axis is is now not
being duplicated past this point when it reaches that barrier it just stops.
So you're pushing in here we go.
We can see it clips at that point.
Now you may notice it behaves weirdly one way and the other but it absolutely clips at that point which
is really useful it means you can now start building up a model quite quickly without needing to worry
about it.
Now if you were starting afresh with a fresh cube you may want to divide it up first so we can go into
edit mode and go control and up a loop cuts around the axis that you want.
In this case I am going to pick the X axis.
I'm going to press escape to stop the moving of it.
So now I've cut it up like that's what I can do is go into wireframe and select some of these vertices
I can then delete those vertices and we've got a hollowed half cube I can then go in and add my mirror
modifier and this time it'll be along the Y axis in this particular example.
And I've unticked X and there we go we've now got half the mesh data that we need to edit which is incredibly
useful.
And of course you can go in and add in a mirror object if you want to do that as well to be really explicit
that this is the point at which these things are mirroring around that's incredibly useful.
Let's say if you built a car and you want a wheel and you want it duplicated on the other side and at
the back end you can use a mirror modifier for doing that.
And I would use empties to position the mirror points.
Now clipping here here's a good example of it if we grab this vertex here we can move it the other side.
See that's pushing through the geometry or we can split it open but if we turn clipping on when we push
those two things together they become one vertex and they merge at that point as well.
That's crucial.
Otherwise you'll end up with doubles.
And that can cause some rendering artifacts if you decide to split it in half and you end up being on
this or this axis is going to be a bit of a pain in the backside to try and use the mirror modifier
because it won't look quite right.
So in this particular case make sure when you do cut your model in so you cut it up either along it's
X or Y axis before using the mirror modifier.
And now it's time for your challenge. Ok so your challenge.
This one will probably take you a good 10, 15 minutes or so to do maybe even about half an hour if you're
spending a lot of time with the modelling however long you take.
Remember you can do several iterations so don't just focus on just doing it once perhaps make a couple
of them and see which one you like the best.
Now start with the chess piece base that we made previously loading your nights reference material divide
the base in two and add a mirror modifier using a mirror object such as the empty we used before the
base should now look like it did originally.
If it doesn't then tweak your settings until it does.
You may have picked the wrong axis on the mirror modify.
Very easy to do.
And this is the bit that should take the most time constructing the rest of your knight.
Now I would recommend starting by blocking out the main shape and then adding detail afterwards rather
than trying to add detail as you go.
You generally get a much better output if you do it like that.
The other thing if you're planning on like me doing some 3D printing at the end of the section to see
what your chess pieces look like then do make sure you don't have any intersecting geometry or any floating
geometry that's not joined to your main mesh.
If you do unfortunately the 3D print will fail.
If you were going down that route just the tip.
And of course I'd want to see how you've got an answer please do share your night over in the discussions.
Now if you've made several iterations I'd love to see your progress too.
So perhaps after you finish your base layer share that and then when you start adding detail go back
and share your progress as well.
Be great.
See how you're getting on, pause the video now and give that a go. Hello everybody and welcome back.
Let's hop on over into blender and make our knight Okay so let's go ahead open up.
I'm not going to be able to open up my original am I.
No.
So let's go ahead.
I need to add a favorite here.
So chess set models.
Now the chess scene is what we're working on pieces chess piece base.
Let's go ahead and open that's up.
There we go.
Now sometimes you will end up with pink material like fest this has just lost its reference which is
fine because I'm going to delete that anyway.
The base I'm now going to pull before I do anything else that save as and call it the night.
Very easy to otherwise lose my chess piece base.
So I've got my base there.
Brilliant.
Okay.
So let's bring in our knights I'm going to add an image as plane in this case I'm going to go to my
knight perfect and I'm going to set it's x dimension so scale it down until it reads roughly 4 on the
scale it down zoom in so I've got a bit more play that's almost there and I suppose it doesn't matter
too much if it's not exactly four centimetres let's move this around so I'm going to rotate it's on
the X axis by 90 and I'm going to rotate on the z axis by 90 as well.
So it's looking forward.
Traditionally the y axis is backwards and forwards.
In fact I want to rotate it on the Z axis by 180 so is facing fully forward and then it's just a matter
of lifting up to the right place.
Now of course this was the pawn base so it will need adjusting as well to an appropriate scale so it's
scale it's up until it was around four centimeters.
So there we go.
Perfect.
So we've got our base pretty much lined up and ready to go.
Let's go and add in our mirror modify so I'm going to hide the reference material for the moment go
into edit mode go into wireframe and use the z key to bring up this radio dial and go to wireframe.
Now I can cut through my model I'm going to bring up the tool shelf because I don't have the right tool
enabled.
I've got a bevelling  tool there.
So let's go to, back to our selection box and select half our model brilliant.
Now we're gonna make a hole in the top and bottom by doing this.
That's not an issue we can fix that later and X and we're going to delete all of those faces.
Now we do have some extra geometry here I'm going to delete that top face and delete the bottom one
as well.
There we go.
So you've got this sort of hollow object for the moment.
Let's go.
Add in our mirror modifier.
Now it's about the X axis at the moment which is great.
I am also as per the challenge going to add in an empty and called it mirror points and make sure that
the piece is mirror point is about that.
Now to be really really accurate what I'm now going to do is I'm going to parents the mirror points
to the base itself.
So if you move the object it stays with its control and P set the parents objects.
And there we go.
And whilst I'm here this needs to be called Knight.
Okay let's save the work as we've done so far and now it's a matter of starting to make our model.
The bottom does need to be filled in so I'm going to go to edge select mode select this edge loop running
around here and press F to fill it in and I'm gonna go back to solid shading for the moment so I can
see what's going on.
Perfect.
Now we've got a hollow model that's absolutely fine with me.
Let's turn back on the might.
And there we go.
So theres a couple of other options on blocking out the model at the moment.
I'm going to do what I did before which is changing this object here so that it's properties it is wireframe.
So I can see through it.
So I'm going to go down to display as and change it to Wired then I can see through and then I can make
the beginning changes.
So this first bit of it is actually really really shallow compared to all the other pieces.
So that's interesting this scale that's in.
And again this is moving things around.
I'm trying to make sure that they only stay on one axis rather than tweaking it and skewing it around
lets scale that up to about there and move it down.
This is probably one of the pieces that's going to have the most amount of detail on it.
So I'm going to move that down as well.
So it's approximately the right place
Okay.
So does cut in really deeply there and I'm going to do that by literally shifting it in and then immediately
extruding up and scaling out again it really does have that harsh transition in and out again.
And I can tweak that again later.
OK.
Some major shapes here.
We're going up and I'm scaling in and moving and scaling out again and I'm trying to leave at this point
the mane of the horse to last so I'm going to cut off the model around there as I go.
And again we can rotate this as well if it's not right in the right place and then it's just a matter
of extruded up again rotating that to fit the right place and then moving it a little and scaling
it's in and then we can add this bulge in here afterwards.
So I'm going to scale that up slightly and then move it because of course we want the horse arching
backwards.
Now the head is an interesting one because if you followed what's I'm currently doing all the way around
what you end up with is this very very tight turn.
Of course you don't need to do that.
We select this top loop here going to come out quickly to make sure it looks okay.
Yes it does.
Do remember to do has very easy to accidentally knot and that can get you kind of confused when you
go back to your model and it's not like it was supposed to be right.
So what we can do here is we can actually extrude all the way up to the top here and perhaps scale that
a little and move it here and there will be something else going on about there.
I can shift that back slightly widen up and then just shift it back.
OK.
Because now what we can do is from these I don't know how many faces there are these two here and obviously
two on the other side.
We can bring the the face of the horse forward and look this is why we need to check our model as we
go if you can see here we're actually splitting away.
And the reason it's doing that is because I forgot to check clipping.
So it's not kept those lines together.
So what's I'm gonna do is select the edge running down the model that looks like it's oh no look it
pushes inside several times.
So let's scale it on the X axis by 0.
So I'm going to X and X again and go zero.
And that's going to flatten it into one particular place.
And that should have alleviated the whole splitting apart that was going on there.
So what that was was was scaling on the local x axis by zero which flattens everything down.
We could do the similar to this top bit here if we wanted this top edge loop running around flat.
We could scale it this time because it's on the top.
On the z axis.
But the locals that axis by 0 and it will flatten it out.
I don't want to do that but that's a useful tip for you to know.
So there will be these eight faces and we're going to move them forward.
And this is also going to be where it comes in use again.
So we're going to go extrude those out all the way over here and we're going to go scale Y, Y zero.
And that's going to flatten all of those obviously make it very large at some point.
And we need to sort that out.
But it gets us to the part that we need so we need these two edges here and we need to bring them in
because that is far far too wide.
So let's bring them in there.
And the same with these two edges here now fortunately I have to select those as an edge loop.
And there we go.
That's the start of the horse.
Now of course this front bit here can be manipulated as well to bring it out a little bit.
Now sometimes if you're on the wrong side of a mirror modifier can be very difficult to select the bit
that you want.
It's actually this edge here.
So if I'm on this edge clicking and nothing's going to happen because this is fake geometry it doesn't
really exist.
This however is real.
And then we can pull that forward slightly so with all of that I'm going to scale it in now so i'm going to
select those four front edges.
I think there's going to be quite a bit of little tweaks here there.
Try and get this looking a bit right and this top and this bottom one here I'm gonna scale those in.
Remember this is a 3D object so it can get quite confusing trying to keep track of everything as good
as you're working with it.
Right.
So now we've got that very can add a loop cut in.
Now you notice the loop doesn't always go where you think it might.
So it's been pulled up here and it's been pulled up there because of the position of this particular
vertex.
Remember you compress the G twice to move a vertex independent but moving along the edge and actually
changing the overall shape that much.
And then when we have a look at this from the side I can select the edge loop I've just made and perhaps
shrink it in ever so slightly to start giving the horse a bit more of a head.
And this one here especially needs to come back.
And by the looks of it needs to come up as well.
And that's the other thing if you're looking at something from an orthographic perspective in this case
looking right at it we can move all of these vertices independently and have it stick to the plane that
it's in so its not going to wander about.
So this is now a matter of moving some bits and bobs about for probably the next 10 15 minutes or so
I'll speed up the video here because that's pretty much all I'm doing.
And if I find something exciting to tell you along the way then I will let you know.
Yes I've got a pointy bit coming out here.
That's no good at all.
Now this is an interesting point so I've just come back here.
Now we don't have a quad at the top here.
I want to keep a quad.
So what I'm gonna do is I'm going to select one edge.
In fact this edge here and then just extrude it roughly in the right direction he says and it's gone
horribly wrong but there we go.
We've now got some geometry that we can use to base the rest of this over so we can then highlight these
two edges.
Press F to fill and these two here should be joined together.
What we will do in order to facilitate that is grab this vertex here turn snapping on make sure it's
on vertex snapping and then we should be able to put one on top of the other.
And then when we move it they're not independent yet.
So we need to make sure that both are selected F3 remove doubles in fact we can probably do this to
the whole model as well so remove doubles.
There we go.
So there was only that one on the entire model.
But now we have a top part of our horse as well somewhere where our mane can come from
So i've just added the lower part of the mouth and I'm now adjusting some of these vertices to make the
mouth a bit more in I suppose as into the body and we go.
And that was quite quite straightforward in order to do that needs filling up the position of these
so they flow round if you've got vertices that dart left right and center can be quite confusing but
I'm liking the front of my knight that's looking really good.
So this is one of these cases where to make this mane there are several options I could just put a loop
cut around and move it really tight.
But the problem with that is we've got this extra geometry running around the rest of our model that
we don't really want there and we'll have to go ahead and move that.
We could also remove a tiny bit of geometry here.
We could dissolve that edge we could delete only the edge itself.
That will mean that's the actual geometry itself flows round it starts hazy and then flows all the way
round the rest of our model.
So then we can come to the base and do exactly the same let's say remove yeah let's remove this one
here.
So X edge.
There we go.
So now we can have our loop cut running just over that bit and then we go back straightaway and fix
the holes we made.
And you'll notice that we get some triangles.
Now I wouldn't worry about those triangles at the moment.
That's absolutely fine.
So we're going to have one two three four fill that's in one two three four and fill that in.
And then these three here as well.
Okay.
Now I can go down and I can select all of these faces running down the model can't select the bottom
and top ones because they aren't quads and then I can extrude them.
Now this is gonna be an interesting extrude because it can only really go in a one way.
So we're gonna have to tweak it afterwards but that's okay.
I could look at it from the side and kind of extrude it roughly at forty four oh you know what.
That's probably going to work.
That's brilliant.
I didn't anticipate that working at all.
And you know what it looks pretty good.
It looks a bit rough here.
I think we may have an.
Yeah.
It snaps in very quickly and I think that's this merged limit causing that because look is under point
one of a centimeter this square here is a centimeter so let's add a decimal place to that.
There we go.
Now we should be able to move this freely so that was our main issue.
Excellent.
So that comes up quite nicely.
I'm gonna grab this top face here and manipulate.
Ever so slightly going to move it forward and up.
Looks good.
Perfect.
Come down here.
How is this bottom look
But this looks horrible.
OK so we might need to do some reconstructive surgery on this bottom bit going on here.
So you've got geometry going through itself.
So it comes down looks good until here.
So we just need to move that out ever so slightly.
So G ,X that's the way we're moving it place it and then we should be able to move it back in.
Perfect.
And probably the same with this one here.
Yeah it's gone right through itself.
So let's select it the G, X sets the Axis we're moving on sets it in place G, X move it back again
And I think the same has happened here hasn't it.
Yes sir.
G, X make sure it's way out of the way.
Then G, X puts it back again.
So that looks pretty good.
Apart from what ever has gone on here.
In fact what I'm going to do is I'm going to start deleting a bit of geometry it looks like that is
horrible.
I'm going to hide my stauton knight and then go to vertex select and just start deleting some of the
geometry here.
There we go.
That's where that's where the geometry is.
Good.
This is where it is bad and we get it snapped back into place.
Excellence and now we can repair this.
Now this is quite a common thing when you're working on a model all of a sudden it just goes funny.
Whether it's a mirror modifier or something else.
But then often it's just a case of trying to recognize where it went or wonky and just fixing that small
part.
Sometimes it can be a real pain and you end up stuck basically but I'm I'm happy with that.
I just need to lower this down so it looks not so in itself so that go G, Z bring that down.
I have still a bit of geometry inside.
There we go.
That's that's what was confusing me.
I might leave it like that but move this one in slightly because it's still supposed to be a main after
all.
There we go.
Excellent.
So there's one final place that I want to add a tiny bit of detail to.
We have a look.
Horses have ears.
If  I hide that  away and their ears come straight back on this particular model.
So we find a place where they have gone straight back so we could use a loop cut running around here.
Place it in and grab this face extrude it out and scale it in and them even maybe in that and push it
in here.
So there you go that looks like a decent enough ear.
I don't like the way it's added this extra geometry round here although with the more detail in the
face.
You know I'm gonna I'm gonna leave it.
I think I would be nit picking if I was doing anything else.
I don't think there's too much detail there that I need to worry about it.
I like the current shape is it is a bit straight down here so I'm going to bring his chest in slightly
so i'm going to select this bit and this bit here and go G, X bring that in.
Yeah that looks a bit better and the same on the back here.
It's modeled after myself a little bit rotund.
There we go.
G, x move that back a little so probably this bit here as well.
Oh I don't want to delete it.
Dangers of resting your hand over a key you're about to use.
Ah there we go there we go.
I'm liking the look of that maybe puff him out just a little bit more here.
I would say his main was just a little bit too small at this point.
Here I'm going to grab the edge.
I think this edge here other thing is too small.
I just don't think it follows the curvature properly.
So let's move that out and I think we're good.
Now I am just nit picking at the moment.
I think this bit here doesn't need to be a triangle.
I think where this next bit further up can be or even the bitterness underneath.
So I'm going to bring this with snapping turned on again I'm gonna pop it on top of that one and then
on top of that one that just needs ends up the bits we can see and in fact I think we can probably move
this up a bit further.
Yes that looks that looks fine to me it's now just a matter of tweaking these a little so the faces
aren't all cut into one another and that one there as well as it is inside itself.
We've got geometry inside itself so let's make sure we remove doubles.
Then when I select that it should move all together.
I don't think that needs to be there.
Let's move that all the way down to the bottom.
Perfect so one two three four all of us interesting but we can't merge that Vertex but we can dissolve
this edge here.
So if I go ahead and dissolve its we get a quad on the bottom one two three four.
Perfect.
I'm asked to do the bottom without any quads.
Excellent.
Can we do the same to the top.
Got myself a challenge here now.
I'm not going to FAF around at the top.
I think it looks pretty neat.
In fact these is slightly I could no now  I'm starting to play now.
I'm really happy.
How mines turned out here.
Oh and because I've gone into rendered mode this is suddenly stood out to me and I've glossed over it
before.
We have some extra sharp sorry mean increases that have been applied here and they might not want to
be there.
They've just inherited from previously.
So I'm going to go ahead here and select all and lower the May increase back down to zero.
So that's not an issue and I can add them in again if they are an issue later on but for the moment
I don't want to worry about that whilst everything is selected I'm going to remove doubles one last
time I'm liking how that's looking.
Excellent.
How did you guys get one
I'm really looking forward to seeing your knights.
Remember to share your work over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.